Update Gas and Fees, Blocks and Transactions pages (#3509)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/gas/index.md

Gas fees are paid in Ethereum's native currency, ether (ETH). Gas prices are denoted in gwei, which itself is a denomination of ETH - each gwei is equal to 0.000000001 ETH (10<sup>-9</sup> ETH). For example, instead of saying that your gas costs 0.000000001 ether, you can say your gas costs 1 gwei.

## Prior to the London upgrade {#pre-london}

The way transaction fees on the Ethereum network are calculated changed during the London network upgrade. Here is a recap of how things used to work:

Let's say Alice had to pay Bob 1 ETH.
In the transaction the gas limit is 21,000 units and the gas price is 200 gwei.

Total fee would have been: `Gas units (limit) * Gas price per unit`
i.e `21,000 * 200 = 4,200,000 gwei` or 0.0042 ETH

When Alice sent the money, 1.0042 ETH would be deducted from Alice's account.
Bob would be credited 1.0000 ETH.
Miner would receive 0.0042 ETH.

This video offers a concise overview of gas and why it exists:

<iframe width="100%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AJvzNICwcwc" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> ## After to the London upgrade {#post-london}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## After the London upgrade {#post-london}
```

> Starting with [the London update](/history/#london), every block has a base fee, the minimum per gas price for inclusion in this block. Optionally, users can set a priority fee (tip).

Reviewer: I'd suggest adding a brief paragraph to being the "After the London update" where we summarize the high level goals, e.g. 1) reducing variance of tx fees/delays through flexible block sizes, 2) improve UX by making fees more predictable 3) decrease rate of inflation by burning tx fees.

Reviewer: Good resource on the "why": https://hackmd.io/@timbeiko/why-1559

Reviewer 2: Hacked.io. Love the idea for getting everyone on the same page.

Reviewer 2: Correction; https://hackmd.io

Author: Included this 

```[The London Upgrade](/history/#london) aims to make transacting on Ethereum more predictable for users by overhauling Ethereum's transaction-fee-mechanism. The high-level benefits introduced by this change include better transaction fee estimation, generally quicker transaction inclusion, and reducing the ETH rate of inflation by burning a percentage of transaction fees.```

> Should we also make note EIP-1559 here during the introduction of the London changes?

Thoughts on keeping EIP-1559 discussion contained within the EIP-1559 heading? I could add a small intro saying that most of the changes we're speaking about were introduced in 1559.

Calculating the total fee works as follows: `Gas units (limit) * (Base fee + Tip)`

Let’s say Jordan has to pay Taylor 1 ETH. In the transaction the gas limit is 21,000 units and the base fee is 100 gwei. Jordan includes a tip of 10 gwei.
Using the formula above we can calculate this as `21,000 * (100 + 10) = 2,310,000 gwei` or 0.0023 ETH.

## Base Fees {#base-fees}

> Every block has a base fee which acts as a reserve price. To be eligible for inclusion in a block the offered price per gas must at least equal the base fee. The base fee is calculated independently of the current block and is instead determined by the blocks before it - making transaction fees more predictable for users. When the block is mined this base fee is "burned", removing it from circulation.

Reviewer: We should call out that the base fee is calculated by the protocol itself & is a value that's supplied by clients.

Reviewer: Also worth mentioning that it fluctuates based on network demand?

Author: > We should call out that the base fee is calculated by the protocol itself & is a value that's supplied by clients.

Agreed

>Also worth mentioning that it fluctuates based on network demand?

It's stated explicitly in 'block size' paragraph but may make some sense to include here depending on the order we go with. I'll revisit after looking at the ordering of paragraphs as referenced here [in this comment](https://github.com/ethereum/ethereum-org-website/pull/3509#discussion_r682166844).

## Block Size {#block-size}

> EIP-1559 introduced variable-size blocks to Ethereum. Each block has a target size of 15 million gas but the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demands, up until the block limit of 30 milion gas (2x target block size). An equilibrium block size of 15 million on average is achieved through the process of _tâtonnement_. This means if the block size is greater than the target block size, the base fee will increase. Similarly, if the block size is less than the target block size the base fee will decrease. The amount the base fee is adjusted by is proportional to how far from the target the block size is. [More on blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The London upgrades (via EIP-1559) introduced variable-size blocks to Ethereum. Each block has a target size of 15 million gas but the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demands, up until the block limit of 30 milion gas (2x target block size). An equilibrium block size of 15 million on average is achieved through the process of _tâtonnement_. This means if the block size is greater than the target block size, the base fee will increase. Similarly, if the block size is less than the target block size the base fee will decrease. The amount the base fee is adjusted by is proportional to how far from the target the block size is. [More on blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/).
```

Reviewer: This is the first place we mention EIP-1559. I think we should explain somewhere that this is part of the London upgrade.

Author: I think it makes sense to remove reference to 1559 here and instead explain in the "THE LONDON UPDATE" (to be renamed as suggested in another comment) that many of the changes we're referencing as the London Upgrade are specific to 1559.

> EIP-1559 introduced variable-size blocks to Ethereum. Each block has a target size of 15 million gas but the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demands, up until the block limit of 30 milion gas (2x target block size). An equilibrium block size of 15 million on average is achieved through the process of _tâtonnement_. This means if the block size is greater than the target block size, the base fee will increase. Similarly, if the block size is less than the target block size the base fee will decrease. The amount the base fee is adjusted by is proportional to how far from the target the block size is. [More on blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EIP-1559 introduced variable-size blocks to Ethereum. Each block has a target size of 15 million gas but the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demand, up until the block limit of 30 milion gas (2x the target block size). The protocol achieves an equilibrium block size of 15 million on average through the process of _tâtonnement_. This means if a block size is greater than the target block size, the protocol will increase the base fee for the following block. Similarly, if a block size is less than the target block size, the protocol will decrease the base fee. The amount the base fee is adjusted by is proportional to how far from the target the block size is. [More on blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/).
```

Reviewer: Let's always try to use active vs passive voice 😄

> ## Base Fees Continued {#base-fees-continued}

Reviewer: Should we just put this section within the "base fee" section above? Seems weird to have "base fee" then "base fees continued". I see how it's a bit tricky because you want to introduce the block size changes as well 🤔  - perhaps we move the section on block size first, then have a single section on base fee?

| Block Number | Included Gas | Fee Increase | Current Base Fee |
| ------------ | -----------: | -----------: | ---------------: |
| 1            |          15M |           0% |         100 gwei |
| 2            |          30M |           0% |         100 gwei |
| 3            |          30M |        12.5% |       112.5 gwei |
| 4            |          30M |        12.5% |       126.5 gwei |
| 5            |          30M |        12.5% |       142.4 gwei |
| 6            |          30M |        12.5% |       160.2 gwei |
| 7            |          30M |        12.5% |       180.2 gwei |
| 8            |          30M |        12.5% |       202.8 gwei |

Relative to the pre-London gas auction market, this transaction-fee-mechanism change causes fee prediction to be more reliable. Following the table above - to create a transaction on block number 9, a wallet will let the user know with certainty that the **maximum base fee** to be added to the next block is `current base fee * 112.5%` or `202.8 gwei * 112.5% = 256.8 gwei`.

## Tips {#tips}

> As the base fee (which in the previous transaction fee mechanism would have gone to the miner) is burned, a priority fee (tip) is used to incentivise miners to include a transaction in the block they are mining. Without tips, it would be economically viable for miners to mine empty blocks, as they would receive the same block reward. Under normal conditions a small tip provides miners a minimal incentive to include a transaction and high tips can provide incentive for special treatment.

Reviewer: "As the base fee (which in the previous transaction fee mechanism would have gone to the miner) is burned" - this is a bit confusing, because previously _there was no base fee_.

Author: Reworded to 

>Before the London Upgrade, miners would receive the total gas fee from any transaction included in a block.
>
> With the new base fee getting burned, the London Upgrade introduced a priority fee (tip) to incentivize miners to include a transaction in the block.

> As the base fee (which in the previous transaction fee mechanism would have gone to the miner) is burned, a priority fee (tip) is used to incentivise miners to include a transaction in the block they are mining. Without tips, it would be economically viable for miners to mine empty blocks, as they would receive the same block reward. Under normal conditions a small tip provides miners a minimal incentive to include a transaction and high tips can provide incentive for special treatment.

Reviewer: "high tips can provide incentive for special treatment." - is there a more specific phrase than "special treatment"? Not really clear what that means. Prioritized inclusion in a block?

> ## Max Fee {#maxfee}

Reviewer: As mentioned above, I suggest we move all these as subheaders of "After the London update".

> To execute a transaction on the network users are able to specify a maximum limit they are willing to pay for their transaction to be executed. This optional parameter is known as the `maxFeePerGas`. In order for a transaction to be executed the max fee must exceed the sum of the base fee and the tip.

Reviewer: Should we also touch on the concept of a refund? I think that's a nice value add of EIP 1559.

> ## The London update {#gas-price-london-update}

Reviewer: Perhaps we change this header to EIP-1559? We already have headers on the London update & this section seems to specifically cover 1559.

Gas fees are paid in Ethereum's native currency, ether (ETH). Gas prices are denoted in gwei, which itself is a denomination of ETH - each gwei is equal to 0.000000001 ETH (10<sup>-9</sup> ETH). For example, instead of saying that your gas costs 0.000000001 ether, you can say your gas costs 1 gwei.

## Prior to the London upgrade {#pre-london}

The way transaction fees on the Ethereum network are calculated changed during the London network upgrade. Here is a recap of how things used to work:

Let's say Alice had to pay Bob 1 ETH.
In the transaction the gas limit is 21,000 units and the gas price is 200 gwei.

Total fee would have been: `Gas units (limit) * Gas price per unit`
i.e `21,000 * 200 = 4,200,000 gwei` or 0.0042 ETH

When Alice sent the money, 1.0042 ETH would be deducted from Alice's account.
Bob would be credited 1.0000 ETH.
Miner would receive 0.0042 ETH.

This video offers a concise overview of gas and why it exists:

<iframe width="100%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AJvzNICwcwc" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> ## After the London Upgrade {#post-london}

Reviewer 3: This section misses the `maxFeePerGas`, which is the root of the UX improvements of EIP-1559. With this, users specify the maximum they are willing to pay, and get a refund for anything "extra". 

For example, if the network's `baseFeePerGas` is 100 gwei, and Alice wants to send Bob 1 ETH, she can set her `maxFeePerGas` to 200 gwei, have a 2 gwei tip for the miner, and she will only pay 102 gwei. 100 gwei is burnt, 2 goes to the miner, and 98 is refunded to her (and 1 ETH goes to Bob). 

This means a user can just set whatever their maximum willingness to pay is and not worry they are overpaying "beyond" the `baseFeePerGas` when their txn gets executed.

> [The London Upgrade](/history/#london) aims to make transacting on Ethereum more predictable for users by overhauling Ethereum's transaction-fee-mechanism. The high-level benefits introduced by this change include better transaction fee estimation, generally quicker transaction inclusion, and reducing the ETH rate of inflation by burning a percentage of transaction fees.

Reviewer 3: > reducing the ETH rate of inflation by burning a percentage of transaction fees.

I've seen people push back against using "inflation" when talking about "issuance" because inflation is often thought of as "loss of purchasing power". Consider rephrasing to "offsetting the ETH issuance by burning..."

> Starting with the London network upgrade, every block has a base fee, the minimum price per unit of gas for inclusion in this block, calculated by the network protocol based on network demand. Optionally, users can also set a priority fee (tip).

Reviewer 3: "network protocol" seems redundant. You could use either, e.g. "by the protocol based on network demand", or "by the network based on demand for block space".

Reviewer 3: > Optionally, users can also set a priority fee (tip).

The priority fee isn't optional. It is not strictly required, but we expect ~all transactions (except, say, MEV bundles) to have it. I would rephrase as: "Because this part of the transaction fee is burnt, users are also expected to set a priority fee (tip) in their transactions. This compensates miners for the work of executing and propagating user transactions in blocks, and is expected to be set automatically by most wallets.".

Calculating the total transaction fee works as follows: `Gas units (limit) * (Base fee + Tip)`

Let’s say Jordan has to pay Taylor 1 ETH. In the transaction the gas limit is 21,000 units and the base fee is 100 gwei. Jordan includes a tip of 10 gwei.

Using the formula above we can calculate this as `21,000 * (100 + 10) = 2,310,000 gwei` or 0.0023 ETH.

When Jordan sends the money, 1.0023 ETH will be deducted from Jordan's account.
Taylor will be credited 1.0000 ETH.
Miner receives the tip of 0.000195 ETH.
Base fee of 0.001953 ETH is burned.

### Block Size {#block-size}

Before the London Upgrade, Ethereum had fixed-sized blocks. In times of high network demand, these blocks operated at total capacity. As a result, users often had to wait for high demand to reduce to get included in a block, which led to a poor user experience.

> The London Upgrade introduced variable-size blocks to Ethereum. Each block has a target size of 15 million gas but, the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demand, up until the block limit of 30 million gas (2x the target block size). The protocol achieves an equilibrium block size of 15 million on average through the process of _tâtonnement_. This means if the block size is greater than the target block size, the protocol will increase the base fee for the following block. Similarly, the protocol will decrease the base fee if the block size is less than the target block size. The amount the base fee is adjusted by is proportional to how far from the current block size is from the target. [More on blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/).

Reviewer 3: This is very good!

> ### Base Fees {#base-fees}

Reviewer 3: I would use the singular here

Every block has a base fee which acts as a reserve price. To be eligible for inclusion in a block the offered price per gas must at least equal the base fee. The base fee is calculated independently of the current block and is instead determined by the blocks before it - making transaction fees more predictable for users. When the block is mined this base fee is "burned", removing it from circulation.

The base fee is calculated by a formula that compares the size of the previous block (the amount of gas used for all the transactions) with the target size. The base fee will increase by a maximum of 12.5% per block if the target block size is exceeded. This exponential growth makes it economically non-viable for block size to remain high indefinitely.

> | Block Number | Included Gas | Fee Increase | Current Base Fee |

Reviewer 3: It might be worth putting some "far" numbers to show how quickly the base fee increases, e.g. 30 blocks full, 100, etc. and adding a note saying it is unlikely we see extended spikes of full blocks because of this rate of increase.

| ------------ | -----------: | -----------: | ---------------: |
| 1            |          15M |           0% |         100 gwei |
| 2            |          30M |           0% |         100 gwei |
| 3            |          30M |        12.5% |       112.5 gwei |
| 4            |          30M |        12.5% |       126.5 gwei |
| 5            |          30M |        12.5% |       142.4 gwei |
| 6            |          30M |        12.5% |       160.2 gwei |
| 7            |          30M |        12.5% |       180.2 gwei |
| 8            |          30M |        12.5% |       202.8 gwei |

Relative to the pre-London gas auction market, this transaction-fee-mechanism change causes fee prediction to be more reliable. Following the table above - to create a transaction on block number 9, a wallet will let the user know with certainty that the **maximum base fee** to be added to the next block is `current base fee * 112.5%` or `202.8 gwei * 112.5% = 256.8 gwei`.

> ### Tips {#tips}

Reviewer 3: The official term is priority fee, so perhaps consider naming this section "Priority Fee (Tips)" ?

Author: Makes sense. Tbh I wasn't sure overall how to refer to tips - i.e. sticking official spec terminology vs likely wallet terminology.

Before the London Upgrade, miners would receive the total gas fee from any transaction included in a block.

With the new base fee getting burned, the London Upgrade introduced a priority fee (tip) to incentivize miners to include a transaction in the block. Without tips, miners would find it economically viable to mine empty blocks, as they would receive the same block reward. Under normal conditions, a small tip provides miners a minimal incentive to include a transaction. For transactions that need to get preferentially executed ahead of other transactions in the same block, a higher tip will be necessary to attempt to outbid competing transactions.

### Max Fee {#maxfee}

To execute a transaction on the network users are able to specify a maximum limit they are willing to pay for their transaction to be executed. This optional parameter is known as the `maxFeePerGas`. In order for a transaction to be executed the max fee must exceed the sum of the base fee and the tip. The transaction sender is refunded the difference between the max fee and the sum of the base fee and tip.

## EIP-1559 {#eip-1559}

> The implementation of [EIP-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) in the London Upgrade makes the transaction fee mechanism more complicated than the simple gas price auction, but it has the advantage of making gas fees more predictable, as well as making ETH more valuable by removing some of it from circulation. The base fee functions as a [second price auction](https://oko.uk/blog/first-price-vs-second-price-auctions),

Reviewer 3: A few nits here :-) 
```suggestion
The implementation of [EIP-1559](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md) in the London Upgrade makes the transaction fee mechanism more complex than the current gas price auction, but it has the advantage of making gas fees more predictable, resulting in a more efficient transaction fee market. 
```

I don't think it is a good idea to imply that 1559 will "make ETH more valuable", given how many other factors affect the price of cryptocurrency. 

Additionally, the base fee doesn't make the network use a second price auction. 2nd price auctions require a trusted third party, which we can't have in Ethereum. The `baseFee` is our way of gauging demand for block space (and subsequently pricing that block space) _without_ a 2nd price auction.

> which is more efficient than the previous mechanism that is a first price auction. Users can submit transactions with a much higher tip, corresponding

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which is more efficient than the previous mechanism that is a first price auction. Users can submit transactions with a `maxFeePerGas`corresponding to how much they are willing to pay for the transaction to be executing, knowing that they will not pay more than the market price for gas (`baseFeePerGas`), and get any extra, minus their priority fee, refunded. 
```

> In essence, gas fees are paid in Ethereum's native currency, ether (ETH). Gas prices are denoted in gwei, which itself is a denomination of ETH - each gwei is equal to 0.000000001 ETH (10<sup>-9</sup> ETH). For example, instead of saying that your gas costs 0.000000001 ether, you can say your gas costs 1 gwei.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gas fees are paid in Ethereum's native currency, ether (ETH). Gas prices are denoted in gwei, which itself is a denomination of ETH - each gwei is equal to 0.000000001 ETH (10<sup>-9</sup> ETH). For example, instead of saying that your gas costs 0.000000001 ether, you can say your gas costs 1 gwei.
```

> ## Prior to the London update {#pre-london}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prior to the London upgrade {#pre-london}
```

> The way transaction fees on the Ethereum network are calculated changed during the London update. Here is a recap of how things used to work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way transaction fees on the Ethereum network are calculated changed during the London network upgrade. Here is a recap of how things used to work:
```

> Let's say Alice had to pay Bob 1ETH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say Alice had to pay Bob 1 ETH.
```

In the transaction the gas limit is 21,000 units and the gas price is 200 gwei.

Total fee would have been: `Gas units (limit) * Gas price per unit`
i.e `21,000 * 200 = 4,200,000 gwei` or 0.0042 ETH

> Now, when Alice sent the money, 1.0042 ETH will be deducted from Alice's account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Alice sent the money, 1.0042 ETH would be deducted from Alice's account.
```

Bob would be credited 1.0000 ETH.

> Miner got 0.0042 ETH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Miner would receive 0.0042 ETH.
```

This video offers a concise overview of gas and why it exists:

<iframe width="100%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AJvzNICwcwc" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> ## After to the London update {#post-london}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## After to the London upgrade {#post-london}
```

> Starting with [the London update](/history/#london), every block has a base fee, the minimum per gas price for inclusion in this block. Optionally, users can set a priority fee (tip).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with [the London network upgrade](/history/#london), every block has a base fee - the minimum per gas price for inclusion in this block. Optionally, users can set a priority fee (tip).
```

Reviewer: "the minimum per gas price" sounds a bit weird. Is it accurate to say "minimum gas price"?

Reviewer: I think it's important to explicitly call out that now there is 2 elements of transaction fees:  1) the base fee & 2) the tip. Previously there was only 1. Perhaps "base fees" & "tips" sections should be explicitly numbered as subheaders?

Author: > "the minimum per gas price" sounds a bit weird. Is it accurate to say "minimum gas price"?

I don't think so because ``baseFee * gasLimit = minimumGasPrice``. How about 'minimum price per unit of gas'?

Reviewer: Ya I like that.

> Calculating the total fee works as follows: `Gas units (limit) * (Base fee + Tip)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calculating the total transaction fee works as follows: `Gas units (limit) * (Base fee + Tip)`
```

Let’s say Jordan has to pay Taylor 1 ETH. In the transaction the gas limit is 21,000 units and the base fee is 100 gwei. Jordan includes a tip of 10 gwei.

> Using the formula above we can calculate this as `21,000 * (100 + 10) = 2,310,000 gwei` or 0.0023 ETH.

Reviewer: I think it'd be useful to break out where the ETH goes like you did above, i.e. show the amount of ETH deducted from Jordan, ETH to Taylor, ETH burned & ETH to miner.

Author: I did! Don't know where it went haha. Included it now.

## Base Fees {#base-fees}

Every block has a base fee which acts as a reserve price. To be eligible for inclusion in a block the offered price per gas must at least equal the base fee. The base fee is calculated independently of the current block and is instead determined by the blocks before it - making transaction fees more predictable for users. When the block is mined this base fee is "burned", removing it from circulation.

## Block Size {#block-size}

> EIP-1559 introduced variable-size blocks to Ethereum. Each block has a target size of 15 million gas but the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demands, up until the block limit of 30 milion gas (2x target block size). An equilibrium block size of 15 million on average is achieved through the process of _tâtonnement_. This means if the block size is greater than the target block size, the base fee will increase. Similarly, if the block size is less than the target block size the base fee will decrease. The amount the base fee is adjusted by is proportional to how far from the target the block size is. [More on blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/).

Reviewer: This is the first place we mention EIP-1559. I think we should explain somewhere that this is part of the London upgrade.
